# Analysis of variation

## Calling variants in haploid mixtures

The development of modern genomic tools and formats have been driven by large collaborative initiatives such as 1,000 Genomes, GTEx and others. As a result the majority of current variant callers have been originally designed  for diploid genomes of human or model organisms where discrete allele frequencies are expected. Bacterial and viral samples are fundamentally different. They are represented by mixtures of multiple haploid genomes where the frequencies of individual variants are continuous. This renders many existing variant calling tools unsuitable for microbial and viral studies unless one is looking for fixed variants. However, recent advances in cancer genomics have prompted developments of somatic variant calling approaches that do not require normal ploidy assumptions and can be used for analysis of samples with chromosomal malformations or circulating tumor cells. The latter situation is essentially identical to viral or bacterial resequencing scenarios. As a result of these developments the current set of variant callers appropriate for microbial studies includes updated versions of “legacy” tools (`FreeBayes` ([Garrison and Marth 2012]) and `mutect2` (a part of GATK (DePristo et al. 2011)) as well as dedicated packages (`Breseq` (Barrick et al. 2009), `SNVer` (Wei et al. 2011), and `lofreq` (Wilm et al. 2012)). To assess the applicability of these tools we first considered factors related to their long-term sustainability, such as the health of the codebase as indicated by the number of code commits, contributors and releases as well as the number of citations. After initial testing we settled on three callers: `FreeBayes`, `mutect2`, and `lofreq` (Breseq’s new “polymorphism mode” has been in experimental state at the time of testing. `SNVer` is no longer actively maintained). `FreeBayes` contains a mode specifically designed for finding sites with continuous allele frequencies; `Mutect2` features a so called mitochondrial mode, and `lofreq` was specifically designed for microbial sequence analysis. 

Our goal was to identify variants in mixtures of multiple haplotypes sequenced at very high coverage. Such dataset are typical in modern bacterial and viral genomic studies. In addition, we are seeking to be able to detect variants with frequencies around the NGS detection threshold of ~ 1% (Salk et al. 2018). In order to achieve this goal we selected a test dataset, which is distinct from data used in recent method comparisons (Bush et al. 2019; Yoshimura et al. 2019). These data originate from a duplex sequencing experiment recently performed by our group (Mei et al. 2019).  In this dataset a population of E. coli cells transformed with pBR322 plasmid is maintained in a turbidostat culture for an extensive period of time. Adaptive changes accumulated within the plasmid are then revealed with duplex sequencing (Schmitt et al. 2012). Duplex sequencing allows identification of variants at very low frequencies. This is achieved by first tagging both ends of DNA fragments to be sequenced with unique barcodes and subjecting them to paired-end sequencing. After sequencing read pairs containing identical barcodes are assembled into families. This procedure allows to reliably separate errors introduced during library preparation and/or sequencing (present in some but not all members of a read family) from true variants (present in all members of a read family derived from both strands).

For the following analysis we selected two data points from Mei et al. (Mei et al. 2019): one corresponding to the beginning of the experiment (s0) and the other to the end (s5). The first sample is expected to be nearly clonal with no variation, while the latter contains a number of adaptive changes with frequencies around 1%. We aligned duplex consensus sequences (DCS) against the pBR322 (see Methods). We then walked through read alignments to produce counts of non-reference bases at each position (Fig. 1). Because all differences identified this way are derived from DCS reads they are a reasonable approximation for a “true” set of variants. s0 and s5 contained 38 and 78 variable sites with at least two alternative counts, respectively (among 4,361 bases on pBR322) of which 27 were shared. We then turned our attention to the set of sites that were determined by Mei et al. to be under positive selection (sites 3,029, 3,030, 3,031, 3,032, 3,033, 3,034, 3,035, 3,118). Changes at these sites increase the number of plasmid genomes per cell. Sample s0 does not contain alternative bases at any of these sites (Fig. 1). Results of the application of the three variant callers with different parameter settings are summarized in Fig. 1. The lofreq performed the best followed by mutect2 and FreeBayes. The main disadvantage of mutect2 is in its handling of multiallelic sites (e.g., 3,033 and 3,118) where multiple alternative bases exist. At these sites mutect2 outputs alternative counts for only one of the variants (the one with highest counts; this is why at site 3118 A and T counts are identical). Given these results we decided to use mutect2 and lofreq for the main analysis of the data.

